docs: add TwoDSensorModule documentation (#1006)
thousandbrainsproject/tbp.monty: docs/how-monty-works/sensor-module/two-d-sensor-module.md

---
title: TwoDSensorModule
---

# TwoDSensorModule

> `TwoDSensorModule` is a sensor module for learning 2D surface models of 3D objects. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`TwoDSensorModule` is a sensor module that enables learning 2D models of 2D objects that exist in a 3D world. 
```

> The module treats local texture edges as pose information and treats motion across the object as motion in a transported 2D coordinate system. This makes it possible to learn flattened edge layouts from curved surfaces while still sending `location`, `displacement`, and `pose_vectors` fields that downstream learning modules already understand.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The module extracts local texture edges as morphological features, providing local pose information, analogous to the surface normal and principle curvature directions in the standard `CameraSM`. In addition, it treats motion across the surface of an object as motion in a transported 2D coordinate system. This makes it possible to learn flattened edge layouts from curved surfaces while still sending `location`, `displacement`, and `pose_vectors` fields that downstream learning modules already understand.
```

> For the detailed implementation notes, edge-detection math, movement derivation, and current experiment results, see the [TwoDSensorModule reference manual](https://www.overleaf.com/project/6a1da43a0bc07c8a1d0a72e1). 

Reviewer: Can you please share this with me on Overleaf (nleadholm@thousandbrains.org)? I don't seem to have access yet.

## What Problem It Solves

A standard RGBD sensor module (`CameraSM`) can estimate 3D locations, surface normals, and curvature directions at the center of a patch. That is useful for modeling 3D shape, but has difficulty distinguishing information that is 2D texture printed or painted onto a surface such as our [compositionality dataset](../../overview/benchmark-experiments.md#compositional-datasets). For example, the TBP and Numenta logos on a disk or mug are defined by 2D edge layouts, even though the surface carrying the logo may be curved.

`TwoDSensorModule` addresses this by building a local 2D model of the surface texture. It still starts from RGBD observations, but it changes the interpretation of the outgoing message:

> - The first two coordinates of `location` and `displacement` are the learned 2D surface model.

Reviewer: "learned 2D surface model" doesn't sound right - there's no learning happening in the SM, and no stored model. I think something like "... `displacement` capture movement in a 2D plane, corresponding to movement along the surface of the object."

Author: Updated.

Second, it tracks movement in a local 2D reference frame. As the sensor moves over a curved surface, the tangent plane changes from one point to the next. `TwoDSensorModule` maintains a transported tangent frame so that the local 2D axes move smoothly across the surface. It then projects each 3D step into that frame and applies a curvature-aware correction so the accumulated displacement better approximates distance along the surface rather than a flattened chord through space.

## Recognizing Compositional Objects

![Learned 2D surface models for logo-bearing objects across different supporting surfaces.](../../figures/how-monty-works/learned_surface_model.png)

In current experiments, `TwoDSensorModule` can learn 2D surface models of logo-bearing objects in the [compositionality dataset](../../overview/benchmark-experiments.md#compositional-datasets) across several supporting surfaces, as shown above.  

> Surface-transfer experiments also show that models learned on one surface can often recognize the same logo-bearing objects on another surface. The matrix below shows recognition accuracy when models are learned on each surface type and then used for inference on the same or a different supporting surface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Surface-transfer experiments also show that models learned on one surface can generalize to the same logo object on another surface, despite distortions introduced by surface geometry. The matrix below shows recognition accuracy when models are learned on each surface type and then used for inference on the same or a different supporting surface.
```

![Surface-transfer recognition accuracies for logo-bearing objects. Rows show the surface used for learning, columns show the surface used for inference, and each cell reports recognition accuracy for that train-test surface pairing.](../../figures/how-monty-works/surface_transfer_accuracies.png)

> 

Reviewer: You could add something like, "We anticipate that SMs which extract lower-dimensional movement and morphological features will be key for robust generalization in settings beyond printed textures on surfaces. For example, a T-shirt could be modeled in 2D with its canonical "T" configuration, but recognized when crumpled in the 3D world by integrating small movements across the distorted surface in 2D space. Similar principles could apply to model an object such as a cable or a string as a 1D object."

Author: Updated.

## Current Limitations

The current implementation has several important constraints:

- It detects one dominant texture edge per patch, so corners, repeated textures, or competing edges can produce ambiguous orientations.
- It embeds the 2D chart in a 3D-shaped message by fixing `z = 0`. 

> - Curved surfaces with nonzero Gaussian curvature cannot be flattened without distortion, and the learned model depend on the exploration path for these objects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Curved surfaces with nonzero Gaussian curvature cannot be flattened without distortion, and the learned model depend on the exploration path for these objects. In practice, the uncorrected distortions appear minimal. 
```
